# PlasBin-flow: A flow-based MILP algorithm for plasmid contigs binning

PlasBin-flow is a tool aimed at extracting from the **assembly graph**
(in <a href="http://gfa-spec.github.io/GFA-spec/">GFA format</a>) of a
bacterial isolate, groups of contigs (called **plasmid bins**), each
groups being assumed to originate from one of a plasmid of the
analyzed isolate.  Currently PlasBin-flow can only process assmbly
graphs genrated by the assembler <a
href="https://github.com/rrwick/Unicycler">Unicycler</a>.

PlasBin-flow is based on a Mixed-Integer Linear Programming (MILP)
formulation that is described in the paper <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btad250">PlasBin-flow: a
flow-based MILP algorithm for plasmid contigs binning</a>.

## Installation

PlasBin-flow can be installed from this repository
```git clone https://github.com/cchauve/PlasBin-flow.git```

PlasBin-flow is composed of two main scripts:
- [plasbin_flow.py](code/plasbin_flow.py) is the main script used to
  process an assembly graph.
- [plasbin_utils.py](code/plasbin_utils.py) is a script used to tune
  palsbin-flow parameters given a reference dataset and preprocess
  a set of samples prior to processing them with plasbin-flow.

### Prerequisites
PlasBin-flow is written in python (version 3.9.11+);
- [plasbin_flow.py](code/plasbin_flow.py) requires
  - the python module <a href="https://networkx.org/">networkX (version 2.7+)<a/>,
  - the ILP solver <a href="https://www.gurobi.com/">gurobi (version 9.1.2+)</a>.
- [plasbin_utils.py](code/plasbin_utils.py) requires the python modules
  - <a href="https://pandas.pydata.org/">pandas (version 2.0.0+)</a>,
  - <a href="https://matplotlib.org/">matplotlib (version 3.7.0+)</a>,
  - <a href="https://seaborn.pydata.org/">seaborn (version 0.12.2+)</a>,
  - <a href="https://biopython.org/">Biopython (version 1.81+)</a>,
  - <a href="https://scipy.org/">scipy (version 1.10.1+)</a>,
  - <a href="https://numpy.org/">numpy (version 1.24.2+)</a>.

[plasbin_utils.py](code/plasbin_utils.py) also requires <a href="https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/doc/blast-help/downloadblastdata.html">BLAST+
v2.6.0</a> (commands makeblastdb and blastn).

We strongly recommand to run PlasBin-flow using a dedicated python virtual environment (see https://docs.python.org/3.9/library/venv.html).  

### Obtaining Gurobi license
PlasBin-flow uses the <a href="https://www.gurobi.com/">Gurobi Solver</a>.
To use PlasBin-flow, a Gurobi license is needed, which is free for academics.  

If you plan to use PlasBin-flow on an institutional High-Performance
Computing system (such as a university cluster or a cluster of the <a
href="https://alliancecan.ca/en">Digital Research Alliance of
Canada</a>), we recommend that you contact a system administrator as
it is lilely that such a license is already available.

Alternatively, to be used on a local system or on a local computer
(all experiments in the paper *PlasBin-flow: A flow-based MILP
algorithm for plasmid contigs binning* were ran on a laptop computer),
you can obtain and install a free academic license following the
instructions provided at <a
href="https://www.gurobi.com/academia/academic-program-and-licenses/">Gurobi:
Always Free for Academics</a>.

## Running PlasBin-flow

**Question**: should we take as input a plasmidness file (contig<TAB>plasmidness score) instead of the mappings file?

### Input files

PlasBin-flow requires the following input files (described in details
below) to process a bacterial isolate:
- assembly graph file,
- reference plasmid genes to assembly contigs mapping file;
- GC content probabilities file.

It also requires two numerical parameters defining the *seed contigs*,
that are contigs that are more likely to belong to a plasmid (see
section 2.4 of the PlasBin-flow paper).

#### Assembly graph

The *assembly graph* of a bacterial sample must be the provided in
<a
href="http://gfa-spec.github.io/GFA-spec/">GFA format</a> file
generated by <a
href="https://github.com/rrwick/Unicycler">Unicycler</a> (file
`assembly.gfa`).  We are currently working to add the possibility to
process GFA assembly graphs generated by other assemblers.

**QUESTION**: gzipped or not; plasbin_utils assumes it is. It should
  be uniformized between the two commands.

#### Mapping file

The *plasmid gene mapping* file is a <a
href="https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK279684/table/appendices.T.options_common_to_all_blast/">blastn
output format 6</a> file obtained by mapping a reference set of
plasmid genes to the assembly graph contigs.

This file is used to define an a priori measure of *plasmidness* of
the assembly contigs, defined as the percentage of the contig covered
by mappings (called the *gene density*).

A user of PlasBin-flow can use a custom reference plasmid genes set
(that can be built using the tuning commands of
[plasbin_utils.py](code/plasbin_utils.py) for example) or use the
default database which is provided in
[genes.fasta](database/genes.fasta), based on the plasmids whose NCBI
accession numbers are listed in
[accessions.txt](database/accessions.txt).  A reference plasmid gene
database is simply a FASTA file, with each entry being assumed to be a
gene.

Given a reference database and an assembly graph file, the mapping
file can be generated by the preprocessing commands of
[plasbin_utils.py](code/plasbin_utils.py).

#### GC content probabilities file

As described in section 2.5 of the PlasBin-flow paper, GC content
plays an important tole in the PlasBin-flow optimization model.
PlasBin-flow relies on a set of relative GC content intervals (a
partition of [0,1] into intervals, each defining a range of relative
GC content, called a GC interval) and requires that each contig *c* is
given, for each GC interval *I* a *probability* that *c* originates
from a molecule of relative GC content in the range defined by *I*.  

By default the considered GC intervals of PlasBin-flow are *[0,0.4],
[0.4,0.45], [0.45,0.5], [0.5,0.55], [0.55,0.6], [0.6,1]* but customs
intervals can be computed using the tuning commands of
[plasbin_utils.py](code/plasbin_utils.py) for example).

Given a GC intervals file and an assembly graph, the GC content
probabilities file can be generated by the preprocessing commands of
[plasbin_utils.py](code/plasbin_utils.py).

#### Seeds parameters

The seed parameters are the minimum length *l* and the minimum gene
density *gd*: any contig of length at least *l* and gene density at
least *gd* is a seed contig.

### Usage

**TO DO**: rename options `outdir` as `out_dir` and `outfile` as `out_file`.

To process a sample, given the input files described above, the
command [plasbin_flow.py](code/plasbin_flow.py) can be used as
follows:

```
python code/plasbin_flow.py \
       -ag assembly_graph \
       -gc gc_content_file \
       -map mapping_file \
       -lthr length_threshold \
       -pthr gene_density_threshold \
	-outdir output_dir \
	-outfile output_file
```
where
- `assembly_graph` is the GFA format assembly graph file,
- `gc_content_file` is the GC content probability file described above
- `mapping_file` is the reference plasmid genes to contigs mapping file described above,
- `lthr` and `pthr` are the length and gene density thresholds defining seeds,
- `output_dir` and `output_file` are the directory and file name for the output file.

The output of PlasBin-flow is a TSV file with each line containing the following information:
```
Plasmid bin			Number (ID) associated with the plasmid bin
Flow value			Flow value associated with the plasmid bin (used as a proxy for the plasmid bin copy number)
GC bin				Index of GC content interval associated with the plasmid bin
Contigs				Comma-separated list of contigs associated with plasmid bin along with their multiplicities
```
Thus a typical line in an output file from PlasBin-flow looks as follows:
```
#Pls_ID	Flow	GC_bin		Contigs
P1	2.5	0.4-0.45	a:2,b:3,c:2,d:1
```

### Preprocessing

The script [plasbin_utils.py](code/plasbin_utils.py) allows to
preprocess a set of samples to create the mapping and GC content
probability files for all samples.

The command to create the mapping files for a set of samples is
```
python plasbin_utils.py map_genes_to_ctgs \
       --input_file input_file \
       --out_dir out_dir \
       --tmp_dir tmp_dir \
       --db_file pls_db_file \
       [--out_file] out_file
```
where

- `input_file` is a CSV file with a header containing at least the
  fields `sample` and `gfa` where the column `sample` contains the
  sample namea and the column `gfa` the paths to the samples gzipped
  GFA files (one sample per line);
- `out_dir` is the directory where the output of the mapping is
  written to a file named `<sample name>.genes_mappings.txt`.
- `tmp_dir` is directory created to hold temporary files.
- `pls_db_file` is the path to reference plasmid genes database file.
- `out_file` is an optional parameter; if provided, a new CSV file
  `out_file` is created that contains an additional column
  `genes2ctgs_mappings` that contains the path to the file `<sample
  name>.genes_mappings.txt`.


The command to create the GC content probabilities files for a set of samples is
```
python plasbin_utils.py gc_probabilities \
       --input_file input_file \
       --out_dir out_dir \
       --tmp_dir tmp_dir \
       --gc_intervals gc_intervals_file \
       [--out_file] out_file       
```
where the parameters `input_file`, `out_dir`, `tmp_dir` are as above
and `gc_intervals_file` is a file that describes the GC intervals,
with one interval boundary per line (so its first line must be 0, its
last line must be 1 and in between the values must be increasing, an
example is provided in
[gc_intervals.txt](example/input/gc_intervals.txt).

The file created for a sample that contains the GC content
probabilities is names `<sample name>.gc.tsv`.

Here too `out_file` is an optional parameter; if provided, a new CSV
file `out_file` is created that contains an additional column
`gc_probabilities` that contains the path to the file
`<sample name>.gc.tsv`.

Finally, both preprocessing commands can be ran at once using
```
python plasbin_utils.py preprocessing \
       --input_file input_file \
       --out_dir out_dir \
       --tmp_dir tmp_dir \
       --db_file pls_db_file \       
       --gc_intervals gc_intervals_file \
       [--out_file] out_file       
```


## Tuning PlasBin-flow parameters

PlasBin-flow requires the user to provide certain parameters in order to generate the plasmid gene mapping file, the GC content file as well as the seed parameters described above. The following scripts help in generating the input for Plasbin-flow.

### Creating the plasmid gene mapping file

#### Creating a plasmid gene database
Prior to creating a plasmid gene mapping file, a database of plasmid genes should be created from a set of reference samples with known plasmids. 
```
python plasbin_utils.py pls_genes_db --input_file input_file --out_dir out_dir --tmp_dir tmp_dir
```
where `input_file` is a CSV file with one line per sample. Each line in the file requires the sample name and the path to a gzipped FASTA file with plasmid sequences for the sample. The `out_dir` is the directory where the plasmid genes database will be written, named as `pls.genes.fasta`. The `tmp_dir` is directory created to hold temporary files.
The set of genes from `pls.genes.fasta` will later be mapped onto contigs to determine the contig plasmidness. Note that if you already have a database of genes in FASTA format, the database creation step can be skipped.

#### Mapping genes to contigs
In this step, the plasmid genes from the database are mapped onto contigs of a given sample.
```
python plasbin_utils.py map_genes_to_ctgs --input_file input_file --out_dir out_dir --tmp_dir tmp_dir --db_file pls_db_file
```
where `input_file` is a CSV file with one line per sample. Each line in the file requires the sample name and the path to a gzipped GFA file for the sample. The `out_dir` is the directory where the output of the mapping is written to a file named <sample>.genes_mappings.txt. The `tmp_dir` is directory created to hold temporary files.
The `pls_db_file` is the path to plasmid genes database file created in the previous step.

### Computing seeds parameters from reference samples
PlasBin-flow takes two parameters as input as the contig length and plasmidness threshold to decide which contig from a given sample can be designated as seeds. Each plasmid bin output by PlasBin-flow should contain at least one seed contig. Seed parameters are decided by observing the length and plasmidness of contigs from the set of reference samples. 

#### Computing ground truth contig sets for reference samples
The length and plasmidness of contigs from reference samples are observed to decide seed parameters. Contigs from a sample are mapped onto the plasmid sequences from the sample to generate the set of contigs belonging to a particular plasmid. 
```
python plasbin_utils.py ground_truth --input_file input_file --out_dir out_dir --tmp_dir tmp_dir [--out_file out_file --pid_threshold p --cov_threshold c]
```
where `input_file` is a CSV file with one line per sample. Each line in the file requires the sample name, the path to a gzipped GFA file and the path to a gzipped FASTA file with plasmid sequences for the sample. The `out_dir` is the directory where the ground truth files are written under the name <sample>.ground_truth.tsv. The `tmp_dir` is directory created to hold temporary files. Parameters `pid_threshold` and `cov_threshold` can be used to provide the percent identity threshold to define a mapping to a plasmid (default=0.95) and the coverage threshold to accept a blast hit (default=0.8) respectively.

The resulting ground truth file lists contigs mapped to plasmids associated with the sample. A line in the ground truth TSV file should contain the name or id of the plasmid in the first column and a contig that has been mapped to the plasmid in the second column. The file can contain other information as long as the first two columns contain the plasmid and contig ids respectively. 
```
#Pls_ID	Ctg_ID
P1	C1
P1	C2
P2	C3
```

#### Computing seed parameters 
The ground truth files generated above are now used to decide the pair of thresholds for contig length and plasmidness for defining seed contigs.
```
python plasbin_utils.py seeds --input_file input_file --out_dir out_dir --tmp_dir tmp_dir --db_file pls_db_file
```
where `input_file` is a CSV file with one line per sample. Each line in the file should contain the sample name, the path to a gzipped GFA file and the path to the ground truth file generated in the previous step. The `out_dir` is the directory where the seeds parameters file is written in `seeds.txt`. The `tmp_dir` is directory created to hold temporary files. The `pls_db_file` is the path to plasmid genes database file created in the database creation step.
Each line of the `seeds.txt` file contains a pair (plasmidness, length) of thesholds separated by a tab. Each pair is considered as one of the best seed parameters for samples in reference set. 

### Creating the GC content file

#### Computing GC intervals from tuning samples
The following script helps in deciding the GC content intervals for PlasBin-flow. It takes as input a list of reference chromosome and plasmid sequences and generates a violinplot of the GC content distribution for both types of sequences. The GC content intervals can then be decided by referring to the violinplots. Alternatively, we also provide a file with suggested GC content intervals according to the reference plasmid sequences.
```
python plasbin_utils.py gc_intervals --input_file input_file --out_dir out_dir --tmp_dir tmp_dir --n_gcints n_gcints
```
where `input_file` is a CSV file with one line per sample, where each line of the file contains the sample name, the path to a gzipped chromosome FASTA file as well as the path to a gzipped FASTA plasmids file. The `out_dir` is the directory where the output is written in the files gc.csv, gc.png and gc.txt. The file gc.csv contains the details of GC content of the sequences. The image file gc.png contains violinplot that can be used to visually decide the GC content intervals. Finally, the file gc.txt contains the suggested GC content intervals in the format required by PlasBin-flow. The `n_gcints` option allows to define the number of GC content intervals between 0 and 1, with a default value of 6 intervals. The `tmp_dir` is directory created to hold temporary files.


### Tuning PlasBin-flow
The following command generates all the files required for tuning PlasBin-flow.
```
python plasbin_utils.py tuning --input_file input_file --out_dir out_dir --tmp_dir tmp_dir
``` 
where `input_file` is a CSV file with one line per sample with 5 required fields; the sample name and paths to a gzipped GFA file, a gzipped chromosome FASTA file, a gzipped plasmids FASTA file and the path to the ground truth file. The `output_dir` is the directory where the tuning files (plasmids genes database, GC content details, GC content distribution violinplot, GC content suggested intervals and GC content seed parameters) are written under the respective names mentioned above. Temporary files are stored under `tmp_dir`.

### Generating the input for PlasBin-flow
The following command generates all the input files required for tuning PlasBin-flow.
```
python plasbin_utils.py preprocessing --input_file input_file --out_dir out_dir --tmp_dir tmp_dir --pls_db pls_db --gc_intervals gc_intervals --out_file out_file
```
where `input_file` is a CSV file with one line per sample. Each line in the file requires the sample name and the path to a gzipped GFA file for the sample. The `output_dir` is the directory where the files to be used in PlasBin-flow are written: the plasmid genes to contigs mapping file (one per sample, <sample>.genes_mappings.txt) and the GC content probabilities file  (one per sample, <sample>.gc.tsv). The `pls_db` is the path to plasmid genes database file created in the database creation step while the `gc_intervals_file` is the GC intervals file generated in GC interval computation step.
The `out_file` is the augmented dataset CSV file, with mapping and GC probabilities files added for each sample.

